Hey they're welcome to another hey they're welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
Let me tell you something.
This is it.
This is the moment.
This is when the men separate from the boys and the women separate from the girls.
The chain rule is here the chain rule is probably the most hated the most mis understood and the most
misused derivative rule there is.
Most students that I teach absolutely hate the chain rule and I think part of the reason why it's because
number one it can be difficult to know when to use it.
And number two it's a little bit tricky because maybe you don't really know what's going on.
There are some new things that we do that we haven't done before and so it is just weird overall.
So in general people don't like it but I'm here to tell you that the chain rule doesn't have to be hard.
It doesn't have to be that difficult.
It doesn't have to be impossible.
In fact all go over the chain rule.
What we use it for.
And of course your favorite mnemonic for the chain rule so that you'll never ever again forget how the
change rule works.
Let's do it.
So let's say that I have this function
so I have this function f of x equals x to the third power.
If we want to get the derivative of that we already know what to do.
It's a power function so we can use the power rule and the power rule says that you bring down your
dictator.
So you bring down the 3 x and substitute back less powerful leader.
So that gives us a two right.
Very easy power function.
That's all we need to do.
Now let me ask your question.
What if I gave you this function instead.
So f of x equals
x plus 5 to the third power.
What would be the derivative then.
So what is the difference between this one and this one and the first one.
You only have X to the third power so it is a power function in this one.
You do not have a power function.
What you have is one function X plus 5 with then another function which elevates it to the third power.
You see that by definition this is not a power function so we can't just say let's bring down or dictate
or three and then keep X plus 5 and then the less powerful leader too.
This is not correct because this is not a power function anymore so this is not right.
Let me give you another example.
What if we have F X
equals square root of x
so we can actually get the derivative of this one because square root of x is the same as saying X to
the one half
and then we can get the derivative by saying.
So bring down a dictator.
That's what one have X and then substitute by a less powerful leader.
So remember that's going to be one to have minus two over two.
Right because we have 1 have minus 1.
We turn that into 1 over 1 and then we multiply top and bottom by 2 so that these two are going to have
the same denominator.
We went over this back in the power.
So one minus two is negative 1 over 2.
So this is negative 1 1/2
and then like we know how to do we bring down this x to the negative one half to the bottom.
We do that by flipping the sign of the exponents.
So we have one on top over the two.
That was already there and we bring down this so we have access to the one half because we flip the
sign again on the exponents and we can finally simplify and say one over to this extra one half becomes
a square root of x we done right.
This is our derivative.
But what if you have instead of half of X equals square root of x why if you had square root of x squared
plus five x
right what is your derivative.
So what is the difference again between this one and this one.
And the first one you have.
Square root of x in this one you have a square root of a more complicated function.
So to get the derivative for this one we can't simply copy what we got here and say for example one
over two square root of you know take this x squared plus 5 x and call it a day.
This is not right.
So I hope you're seeing a pattern here when you have X to the something or square root of x or something
like that just with X as a base then we know how to get the derivative.
However when you have one function with then another function.
So for example in this case the function inside is the expo's 5 and the function outside is elevating
the expo's five to the third power.
In this case we have something similar inside function is x squared plus 5 x and then the outside function
is getting the square root of this inside function.
So it kind of looks like we need a different technique to find derivatives.
When you have one function inside another enter the chain rule.
So let's go into the chain rule the chain rule is a differentiation rule used to find the derivative
of compositions of functions.
So just like the product rule is used for multiplication of functions and the quotient rule is used
for division and the sum rule is used for additions.
The chain rule is used for composition.
That is the key word here.
So if you do not know what this is the composition of functions let me give you an example.
Let's say you have f of x equals x squared.
All right.
So you know you can plug in numbers into this.
You can plug in three.
It's going to give you three squared is nine.
You can plug in 10 that's going to give you 10 squared is 100.
You can plug in four that's going to give you four square.
That's 16 right.
So we can plug in numbers or we can plug in another function into this function.
Yes we can actually do that.
So let's say we have this other function of x
and this function is 3 x minus 2.
All right.
So we have two functions of x x squared and g of x 3 x minus 2.
So we can do a composition like this.
So this is a composition of G.
That means that we're plugging in G into F so let's go ahead and do that here.
Let's take this g of x 3 x minus 2 and plug it in into f of x.
So the rule for F X is square the input.
All right.
So this is equal to saying f of g of X
right.
This might be a little bit weird looking.
But here's what's going on.
We're taking G of x.
That is the input
and we're plugging it in into the rule f.
So let's do it.
The rule says take the input and square it and what's the input.
The input is this other function of x.
So this is the input 3 X minus 2.
And we're going to square it so 3 X minus 2 everything squared is the composition.
Composition G.
So we plugged in G into F.
All right.
Let's do another example.
Let's say we have 4 x
equals the cube roots
of X and g of X equals
x squared.
Minus nine and we want to find composition G.
So this circle means composition.
By the way this composition thing it's not something that you need need need to know for sure for the
chain rule but it's good to know exactly what's going on.
All right.
So remember we're going to plug in G into F. So says take the cube root
of the input and again we said that the input is G.
So cube root of x squared minus nine.
So you see what we did we have this function f of x and we plugged in this x squared minus nine and
substituted the X..
By this other function.
So you might be saying to yourself OK close that's all good and well but how is this useful.
Well it turns out that when you're finding the derivative of compositions of functions you need to use
the chain rule.
You cannot use the regular derivative methods.
So let's go into some examples of when to use the chain rule and when not to use it.
So you get a better idea of what's going on.